[IR] Require that ptrmask mask matches pointer index size (#69343)
llvm/llvm-project: llvm/docs/LangRef.rst

Semantics:
""""""""""

> The result of ``ptrmask(%ptr, %mask)`` is equivalent to the following expansion,

Reviewer: Is this actually true (both before and after)? I would hope that ptrmask does not have the address-exposed semantics that ptrtoint does?

Author: I've added a sentence to clarify that ptrmaks only captures via the return value.

where ``iPtrIdx`` is the index type size of the pointer::

    %intptr = ptrtoint ptr %ptr to iPtrIdx ; this may truncate
    %masked = and iPtrIdx %intptr, %mask

>     %diff = sub iPtrIdx %masked, %intptr

Reviewer 2: But %diff will always be negative right? %masked must be less than %intptr since it's the result of an and.

>     %diff = sub iPtrIdx %masked, %intptr

Reviewer: Indeed, it works specifically because everything is using iPtrIdx arithmetic, and therefore (in two's complement) does not matter whether things are positive or negative, it's just modular arithmetic

>     %diff = sub iPtrIdx %masked, %intptr

Reviewer 3: This definition is like Alive2's implementation. The difference is that right now we do a zero extend or trunc of the mask to match the pointer size.

>     %diff = sub iPtrIdx %masked, %intptr

Reviewer 4: I was thinking of an example like this, with 16-bit pointers and 8-bit indexes:
```
  %ptr = ptr 0x6789
  %mask = i8 0x00
  // ptrmask(%ptr, %mask) expands to:
  %intptr = i8 0x89
  %masked = i8 0x00
  %diff = i8 0x77
  %result = getelementptr i8, ptr 0x6789, i8 0x77
          = ptr 0x6800 // not 0x6700!
```
Have I misunderstood how getelementptr works?

>     %diff = sub iPtrIdx %masked, %intptr

Author: getelementptr only works on the index bits of the pointer. So the result would be `0x6700`, not `0x6800`.

>     %diff = sub iPtrIdx %masked, %intptr

Reviewer 4: OK but I don't see that documented in the semantics: https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#id234

>     %diff = sub iPtrIdx %masked, %intptr

Reviewer 4: Can you please update the documentation of the semantics of getelementptr?

>     %diff = sub iPtrIdx %masked, %intptr

Author: Done as part of https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/70015.

Semantics:
""""""""""

The result of ``ptrmask(%ptr, %mask)`` is equivalent to the following expansion,

> where ``iPtrIdx`` is the index type size of the pointer::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
where ``iPtrIdx`` is the index type size of the pointer:
```
I think this extra ':' is not needed?

Author: The double colon is intentional -- it's a weird bit of rst syntax: https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/basics.html#literal-blocks

    %intptr = ptrtoint ptr %ptr to iPtrIdx ; this may truncate
    %masked = and iPtrIdx %intptr, %mask
    %diff = sub iPtrIdx %masked, %intptr
    %result = getelementptr i8, ptr %ptr, iPtrIdx %diff

Considering this as an operation on the integer representation of the pointer,

> if the pointer index type size is smaller than the pointer type size, this
> implies that the mask is extended with 1 bits to the pointer type size.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
if the pointer index type size is smaller than the pointer type size, this
implies pointer bits beyond the index size are not affected by this intrinsic
(as if the mask was extended with 1 bits to the pointer type size for integral pointers).
```

Maybe something like this addresses @jrtc27's comment that non-index bits are not touched at all for CHERI?

Reviewer: Something like that does indeed sound more appropriate for pointers that aren't just plain integers (though technically our capabilities do still report as being integral, since non-integral pointers are overly-restrictive in their semantics (they imply that ptrtoint gives an unstable value, but ours are as stable as any normal integral pointer)).
